# Codebook

## Description of tidy_data.txt

The file `tidy_data.txt` is generated by the code `run_analysis.R`

One method to read the file into R is to use the following
```{r}
x <- read.table("./tidy_data.txt", header = TRUE)
```
The data.frame generated by this contains:
* 180 rows
* 68 columns

## Reference to original data set (source file for `run_analysis.R`)

The original data set is described in the files `README.txt` and `features_info.txt` which are contained
in the directory "UCI HAR Dataset" (see the README for this project for more details on obtaining this).

To understand the data in the `tidy_data.txt` file requires some context from those files.
In particular:

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 


## Description of columns in `tidy_data.txt` dataset

### Column 1 : subject

Identifies the subject who performed the activity.  Its range is from 1 to 30

### Column 2 : activity

The activity name.  There are 6 possible activity names:

* WALKING
* WALKING_UPSTAIRS
* WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
* SITTING
* STANDING
* LAYING

### Columns 3 to 68 : Averages of each variable

Columns 3 to 68 contain the average values of each variable, grouped by activity and subject.

Since there are 30 subjects and 6 activities per subject, this generates a total of 30 x 6 = 180 rows.

The Column names are listed below.  Note that they are **average** values.  This is not indicated
explicitly in the variable name in this table (the variable names are already long, and appending "avg" or similar doesn't necessarily make the information clearer)

* tBodyAccmeanX
* tBodyAccmeanY
* tBodyAccmeanZ
* tBodyAccstdX
* tBodyAccstdY
* tBodyAccstdZ
* tGravityAccmeanX
* tGravityAccmeanY
* tGravityAccmeanZ
* tGravityAccstdX
* tGravityAccstdY
* tGravityAccstdZ
* tBodyAccJerkmeanX
* tBodyAccJerkmeanY
* tBodyAccJerkmeanZ
* tBodyAccJerkstdX
* tBodyAccJerkstdY
* tBodyAccJerkstdZ
* tBodyGyromeanX
* tBodyGyromeanY
* tBodyGyromeanZ
* tBodyGyrostdX
* tBodyGyrostdY
* tBodyGyrostdZ 
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanX
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanY
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanZ
* tBodyGyroJerkstdX
* tBodyGyroJerkstdY
* tBodyGyroJerkstdZ
* tBodyAccMagmean
* tBodyAccMagstd
* tGravityAccMagmean
* tGravityAccMagstd
* tBodyAccJerkMagmean
* tBodyAccJerkMagstd
* tBodyGyroMagmean
* tBodyGyroMagstd
* tBodyGyroJerkMagmean
* tBodyGyroJerkMagstd
* fBodyAccmeanX
* fBodyAccmeanY
* fBodyAccmeanZ
* fBodyAccstdX
* fBodyAccstdY
* fBodyAccstdZ
* fBodyAccJerkmeanX
* fBodyAccJerkmeanY
* fBodyAccJerkmeanZ
* fBodyAccJerkstdX
* fBodyAccJerkstdY
* fBodyAccJerkstdZ
* fBodyGyromeanX
* fBodyGyromeanY
* fBodyGyromeanZ
* fBodyGyrostdX 
* fBodyGyrostdY
* fBodyGyrostdZ
* fBodyAccMagmean
* fBodyAccMagstd
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagmean
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagstd
* fBodyBodyGyroMagmean
* fBodyBodyGyroMagstd
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagmean
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagstd




#### Further information : Description of the Columns

Descriptions of the meaning of the individual variables is best explained by
reference to the text from the original "features_info.txt" file (reproduced here, with some additional notes)

**Feature Selection** 

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

* tBodyAcc-XYZ
* tGravityAcc-XYZ
* tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
* tBodyGyro-XYZ
* tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
* tBodyAccMag
* tGravityAccMag
* tBodyAccJerkMag
* tBodyGyroMag
* tBodyGyroJerkMag
* fBodyAcc-XYZ
* fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
* fBodyGyro-XYZ
* fBodyAccMag
* fBodyAccJerkMag
* fBodyGyroMag
* fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

* mean(): Mean value
* std(): Standard deviation

**Note that what follows was included in the original data set, but is not included in tidy_data.txt**

* mad(): Median absolute deviation 
* max(): Largest value in array
* min(): Smallest value in array
* sma(): Signal magnitude area
* energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
* iqr(): Interquartile range 
* entropy(): Signal entropy
* arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
* correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
* maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
* meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
* skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
* kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
* bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
* angle(): Angle between to vectors.

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

* gravityMean
* tBodyAccMean
* tBodyAccJerkMean
* tBodyGyroMean
* tBodyGyroJerkMean


